# 16786 - EGR System
## P0402 - 35-10 - Excessive Flow - Intermittent

This code means that the Mass Air Flow (MAF) sensor is reporting more airflow than the Engine Control Module (ECM) is expecting to see. The total airflow to the engine is a combination of new air drawn in through the air filter and past the MAF and recirculated exhaust gasses coming in through the Exhaust Gas Recirculation (EGR) valve. If the EGR valve is not delivering the expected amount of flow, the balance will be made up by air pulled in past the MAF sensor and this code will be set.

The EGR valve is controlled by a vacuum actuator on top of the EGR valve body. The vacuum is modulated by a solenoid valve (N18) on the firewall. There are two solenoid valves there: N18 on the left and N75 which controls the turbocharger is on the right (as you face the engine from the front of the car).

## Possible Failure Modes

1. EGR - plunger stuck or a failed actuator.
1. Vacuum supply to the actuator - leaking hoses or a failed N18.
1. MAF sensor failure.

## Tests

### Expected Values

Vacuum at idle: 27 inHg

Vacuum before EGR plunger starts to move:

Vacuum to fully open EGR:

N18 coil resitance: Ω

#### VCDS

Mass airflow at idle:

EGR Solenoid (N18) Duty Cycle at idle (900 RPM): ~85%

EGR Solenoid (N18) Duty Cycle above 3000 RPM: ~5%

#### Testing the EGR System

#### Testing the  MAF Sensor

### Vacuum System Problems

Without vacuum to operate the EGR valve actuator the ECM will be unable to modulate the amount of exhaust gas being recirculated and this code can be set. The vacuum hoses fail over time by becoming dried out and cracking. They may look fine, but by 200,000 miles or so, they aren't. Silicone hose from McMaster-Carr makes for very nice replacements.

#### Tests:

* **EGR actuator:** disconnect the elbow from the air line from the intercooler to the EGR and look inside. The Anti Shudder Valve (ASV) is the throttle plate like thing. The vertical shaft is the EGR valve plunger. There may be a lot of soot in the throat of the valve. Disconnect the vacuum line from the actuator on top of the EGR (not from the ASV actuator on the back side of the EGR body towards the firewall).

 Then using a MityVac or similar device pull a vacuum on the inlet to the EGR actuator. The vacuum should cause the EGR plunger to move up into the throat of the EGR opening a passage at the bottom for exhaust gasses coming up from below. The vacuum should hold with no or very little leakdown.

 ##### Results:

 * **Actuator holds vacuum and plunger moves:** valve is probably good.
 * **Actuator holds vacuum and plunger does not move: ** if there is a lot of material built up in the throat of the EGR then the plunger may be stuck. It might be worth pulling and cleaning the EGR before replacing the valve.
 * **Acutator does not hold vacuum:** the diaphragm in the actuator has probably failed and the EGR must be replaced – the actuator does not appear to be serviceable.

* **N18 and the vacuum supply:** move your MityVac to the hose from N18 and without starting the engine pull a vacuum. This should also hold a vacuum. Now start the engine and watch the vacuum guage, the vacuum should be significant (the valve should be open at idle).

 If you have access to VCDS I think you could watch the requested vs. actual MAF values (which should be tracking closely, but which presumably are not) while actuating the EGR with a MityVac, if the EGR is working (passed the previous tests) then you should be able to bring the MAF reading into line (assuming the MAF is good). This will also tell you what vacuum reading you should be expecting on the output of N18 at idle. You could also observe how much vacuum is required to open the EGR fully using your MityVac.

 VCDS will also allow you to run an ouput test on the N18 solenoid.

 However you go about it, you want to know that the vacuum line to N18 holds vacuum when the engine is off and that at idle there is enough vacuum to fully open the EGR. If you have that then the EGR system seems to be good and the problem must be on the MAF side of the system.
